\input texinfo @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename tlmu-doc.info

@documentlanguage en
@documentencoding UTF-8

@settitle Transaction Level eMulator (TLMu)
@exampleindent 0
@paragraphindent 0
@c %**end of header

@ifinfo
@direntry
* TLMu: (tlmu-doc).    The TLMu Documentation.
@end direntry
@end ifinfo

@iftex
@titlepage
@sp 7
@center @titlefont{TLMu}
@sp 1
@center @titlefont{Documentation}
@sp 3
@end titlepage
@end iftex

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top

@menu
* Introduction::
* Supported Archs::
* Installation::
* Internals::
@end menu
@end ifnottex

@contents

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction
TLMu extends the QEMU emulation framework making it possible to use QEMU
systems:

@itemize
@item
In a System-C TLM-2.0 environment.
@item
In a heterogeneous arch environment, e.g a MIPS and a CRIS core on
the same virtual system and within the same emulator process.
@item
In a system where RAM's are external to QEMU
@end itemize

TLMu can provide either only the CPU cores or it can provide a more complete
partial system (e.g, CPU core + internal devices). The CPU core or the partial
system can then be integrated with a system written in for example TLM-2.0.

There is good flexibility in how systems can be partitioned. TLMu can use
RAM both internal to the TLMu instance and also external (provided by the
main emulation system). Different TLMu instances within an emulator can cross
access each others RAMs and devices (with some constrains).

TLMu can provide per core execution traces and GDB remote access for
easy guest software debugging.

@node Supported Archs
@chapter Supported Archs

At the moment, the following archs have basic support for TLMu:
@itemize
@item
CRIS
@item
ARM
@item
MIPS
@end itemize

I'd expect most (if not all) archs to work with little integration, but
I haven't tested them. Also, one needs to decide howto connect the interrupt
signals from the external emulator into the TLMu CPU core and write the
glue logic.

@node Installation
@chapter Installation

@section Getting the sources
If you are reading this, you probably already cloned the git tree.

Clone the git tree, for example:
@example
% git clone @code{git://github.com/edgarigl/tlmu.git}
@end example

@section Configuring
Create a build directory (or build it in the src dir) and enter it:
@example
% mkdir build-tlmu
% cd build-tlmu
@end example

To get a list of supported configuration flags, add --help to the argument
list. These are essentially the same as the ones for plain QEMU.

Configure TLMu:
@example
% ../tlmu/configure --extra-cflags=-fPIC
@end example

If you want to install debug versions of TLMu, add --disable-strip to
configure, e.g:
@example
% ../tlmu/configure --extra-cflags=-fPIC --disable-strip
@end example

If you want to save time, and only build for a subset of the archs (e.g CRIS, ARM and MIPS):
@example
% ../tlmu/configure --target-list=cris-softmmu,mipsel-softmmu,arm-softmmu --extra-cflags=-fPIC
@end example


@section Building
Build tlmu:
@example
% make && make tlmu
@end example

Install tlmu:
@example
% make install-tlmu DESTDIR=/tmp/my-tlmu/
@end example

Now you should have a TLMu lib per arch, for example:
@example
% ls /tmp/my-tlmu/lib/
libtlmu-arm.so  libtlmu-cris.so  libtlmu-mipsel.so
@end example

And also the header files needed to interface with TLMu:
@example
% ls /tmp/my-tlmu/include/tlmu/
tlmu.h  tlmu-qemuif.h
@end example

@section Running the examples

An easy way to get started is by taking a look at the examples
distributed with TLMu. Look at tests/tlmu/*

There is a simple example in pure C and another one that shows integration
with System-C TLM-2.0 (C++).

The examples instantiate 3 cores: a CRISv10, an ARM926 and a MIPS 24Kc.
Three guest images are provided, <arch>-guest/guest. The guests all
interact with a magic device that allows them to print:
@example
Hello, I am the <arch>
@end example
and then exit.

Enter the test directory:
@example
% cd build-tlmu/tests/tlmu
@end example

Now install a local copy of the tlmu sdk:
@example
% make install-tlmu
@end example

Build the C example:
@example
% make c_example
@end example

Run the C example
@example
% LD_LIBRARY_PATH=./lib ./c_example
Hello, I am the CRIS
CRIS: STOP: 0
Hello, I am the MIPSEL
MIPS: STOP: 0
Hello, I am the ARM
ARM: STOP: 0
@end example

Before trying the System-C example, you will need to edit
tests/tlmu/sc_example/Makefile. Set the paths to where your
System-C and TLM-2.0 installation is located.

For example:
@example
SYSTEMC = /opt/systemc
TLM2 = /opt/systemc/TLM-2009-07-15
@end example

After editing the Makefile, build the System-C example:
@example
% make sc_example
@end example

Run the System-C example
@example
% LD_LIBRARY_PATH=./lib ./sc_example/sc_example

             SystemC 2.2.0 --- Apr  1 2011 17:09:54
        Copyright (c) 1996-2006 by all Contributors
                    ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
HHHeeellllllooo,,,   III   aaammm   ttthhheee   MACIRRPMIS
SESTOP:  0 22030 ns
@end example

As a short-cut, you can build both examples by doing:
@example
% make sc-all
@end example
And run both examples by doing:
@example
% make run-sc-all
@end example


@node Internals
@chapter Internals

@section Overview

TLMu consists of a set of libraries with corresponding C header files. The
CPU emulators built as shared libraries, one library per supported
architecture (e.g libtlmu-arm.so). To load and use these shared emulator
libraries, one can use the C-API provided by the libtlmu.a library. libtlmu
provides a C interface to load, run, interact with (e.g make bus accesses,
raise interrupts, etc) and finally quit each emulator.

@itemize
@item
include/tlmu/tlmh.h		- Main TLMu API (used by emulators, e.g you)
@item
include/tlmu/tlmh-qemuif.h	- ABI between TLMu and QEMU (used between libtlmu and the CPU emulators)
@item
lib/libtlmu.a			- TLMu C API
@item
lib/libtlmu-arm.so		- TLMu ARM emulator
@item
lib/libtlmu-cris.so		- TLMu CRIS emulator
@item
lib/libtlmu-mipsel.so		- TLMu MIPS (little-endian) emulator
@item
etc
@end itemize

@section C-API
@subsection Creating a TLMu instance

Before performing any TLMu operations, you need to get hold of a TLMu instance.
This can be done by simply creating one and initializing it with tlmu_init().

@example{
/*
 * Initialize a TLMu instance. Takes an instance name as argument.
 */
void tlmu_init(struct tlmu *t, const char *name);
@end example

Example:
@example
@{
    /* Create an instance.  */
    struct tlmu t;
    /* and initialize it.  */
    tlmu_init(&ti, "myTLMu");
@}
@end example

@subsection Loading a TLMu emulator

Loading of an emulator is done by calling tlmu_load. The arguments are
a pointer to a TLMu instance and the name of the emulator library
(e.g libtlmu-cris.so).

@example
/*
 * Load an emulator library.
 *
 * Returns zero on success and non-zero if failing to load the
 * emulator.
 */
int tlmu_load(struct tlmu *t, const char *soname);
@end example

Example:

@example
@{
    int err;

    err = tlmu_load(&t, "libtlmu-arm.so");
    if (err) @{
        fprintf(stderr, "Failed!!!!\n");
    @}
@}
@end example

@subsection Setting up the emulator

Setting up the emulator involves configuration of the QEMU arguments,
setting various TLMu parameters and registering callbacks for the various
events.

@subsection TLMu/QEMU argument list
The QEMU argument list is created by series of calls to tlmu_append_arg.
The various options are documented in XXXXXXX.

@example
/*
 * Append an argument to the TLMu instances argv list.
 */
void tlmu_append_arg(struct tlmu *t, const char *arg);
@end example

Example:
@example
/* Choose a particular ARM model.  */
tlmu_append_arg(t, "-cpu");
tlmu_append_arg(t, "arm926");

/* Pre-load an elf image.  */
tlmu_append_arg(t, "-kernel");
tlmu_append_arg(t, "program.elf");

/* Enable tracing.  */
tlmu_append_arg(t, "-d");
tlmu_append_arg(t, "in_asm,exec,cpu");
@end example

@subsection Setting the log filename
When using enabling execution traces, it is useful to setup a per instance
logfile to avoid having the different TLMu cores stepping on each other.
@example
/*
 * Set the per TLMu instance log filename.
 *
 * t         - The TLMu instance
 * f         - Log filename
 */
void tlmu_set_log_filename(struct tlmu *t, const char *f);
@end example

@subsection Map RAM areas
Internally, TLMu differentiates pretty heavily between RAMs and other devices.
TLMu needs to know if any of the external mappings provided by the main
emulator are RAM devices.

At setup time, you'll need to tell TLMu by calling tlmu_map_ram():
@example
/*
 * Tell the TLMu instance that a given memory area is maps to RAM.
 *
 * t         - The TLMu instance
 * name      - An name for the RAM
 * addr      - Base address
 * size      - Size of RAM
 * rw        - Zero if ROM, one if writes are allowed.
 */
void tlmu_map_ram(struct tlmu *t, const char *name,
                uint64_t addr, uint64_t size, int rw);
@end example

Example:
@example
tlmu_map_ram(t, "rom", 0x18000000ULL, 128 * 1024, 0);
@end example

@anchor{cb_registration}
@subsection Registering callbacks
TLMu emulators will occasionally call back into your emulator to get certain
things done. For example, when making bus accesses that map to external
devices or memory provided by your emulator.

For TLMu emulators to know what functions to call, you need to register them.
Similarly, for you (in the case you have multiple TLMu instances) to know which
instance the call back belongs to, you need to register a pointer to whatever
structure you'd like to be passed at every call back from TLMu.

@example
/*
 * Register a callback function to be called when TLMu emulators need to
 * make bus accesses back into the main emulator.
 *
 * In the callback:
 *  o          - Is the registered instance pointer, see tlm_set_opaque().
 *  clk        - The current TLMu time. (-1 if invalid/unknown).
 *  rw         - 0 for reads, non-zero for write accesses.
 *  data       - Pointer to data
 *  len        - Requested transaction length
 *
 * The callback is expected to return 1 if the accessed unit supports DMI,
 * see tlmu_get_dmi_ptr for more info.
 */
void tlmu_set_bus_access_cb(struct tlmu *t,
                int (*access)(void *o, int64_t clk,
                                int rw, uint64_t addr, void *data, int len));
/*
 * Register a callback for debug accesses. The callback works similarly as
 * the one for tlmu_set_bus_access_cb, but it doesn't have a return value.
 *
 * Debug accesses will be made by various debug units, for example the GDB
 * stub or the tracing units when disassembling guest code.
 */
void tlmu_set_bus_access_dbg_cb(struct tlmu *t,
                void (*access)(void *, int64_t, int, uint64_t, void *, int));
/*
 * Register a callback to be called when the TLMu emulator requests a
 * Direct Memory Interface (DMI) area.
 */
void tlmu_set_bus_get_dmi_ptr_cb(struct tlmu *t,
                        void (*dmi)(void *, uint64_t, struct tlmu_dmi*));
/*
 * Register a callback function to be called at sync points.
 */
void tlmu_set_sync_cb(struct tlmu *t, void (*cb)(void *, int64_t));
@end example

Example:
@example
    /* Register our callbacks.  */
    tlmu_set_bus_access_cb(t, tlm_bus_access);
    tlmu_set_bus_access_dbg_cb(t, tlm_bus_access_dbg);
    tlmu_set_bus_get_dmi_ptr_cb(t, tlm_get_dmi_ptr);
    tlmu_set_sync_cb(t, tlm_sync);
@end example

@subsection Running

Calling tlmu_run will start the TLMu emulator: 
@example
    /* Run.  */
    tlmu_run(t);
@end example

It is also possible to start the CPU emulator in sleep mode:
@example
    tlmu_set_boot_state(t, TLMU_BOOT_SLEEPING);
    tlmu_run(t);

@end example

And later, you can wake it up:
@example
    tlmu_notify_event(t, TLMU_TLM_EVENT_WAKE, NULL);
@end example

@anchor{timing}
@subsection Timing

The recomended way to run TLMu is by using QEMU's icount feature. Specifically
by passing "-icount 1" at setup time.

@example
tlmu_append_arg(t, "-icount");
tlmu_append_arg(t, "1");
@end example

TLMu will synchronize at various sync points. These points are:
@itemize
@item
When the TLMu CPU makes I/O accesses into the main emulator
@item
When the TLMu CPU makes non-DMI memory accesses into the main emulator
@item
When the TLMu CPU gets interrupted
@end itemize

When TLMu synchronizes it will pass a clock value representing the amount of
time passed as seen from within TLMu. When running with -icount 1, the time
will be passed in nano seconds driven by an instruction counter that accounts
2ns per instruction. The main emulator can then transform the TLMu specific
time into a global time based on the actual speed of the particular TLMu
instance.

In some cases, TLMu will hit a sync point but without beeing able to
synchronize. In these cases TLMu will pass -1 as the clk. The main emulator
should treat -1 as a special case, and ignore the synchronization.

@subsection Bus accesses from TLMu
When TLMu cores need to make bus accesses into the main emulator, they do so
by calling the bus_access callback or the bus_access_dbg callback. These
callbacks can be registered per TLMu instance, see @ref{cb_registration} for
more info on howto register them.

The callback looks like this:
@example
int my_bus_access(void *o, int64_t clk, int rw,
                        uint64_t addr, void *data, int len)
@end example

See @ref{cb_registration}. for more info on what the arguments
and return value mean.

@subsection Bus accesses into TLMu
The main emulator can also make bus accesses onto the TLMu system.
These access are done by calling the tlmu_bus_access() function call.

@example
tlmu_bus_access(t, rw, addr, data, len);
@end example

@anchor{interrupts}
@subsection Interrupts
Interrupts are implemented in a machine dependant way. Depending on how you
partition your system, interrupts are done differently. For example, if you
model a TLMu system with only a CPU core, the system might export very few
interrupt lines to the main emulator (e.g modelling only the interrupt signals that enter the
CPU core). If you have a TLMu system with internal
devices, e.g an interrupt controller, TLMu might export 32 or 64 or even more
interrupt lines to the main emulator.

Regardless of how many interrupt lines and their exact meaning, the way the
main emulator controls the lines is the same. It is done by notfiying events
with the tlmu_notify_event() call.

@example
struct tlmu_irq tirq;

tirq.data = 1; /* Raise interrupt line nr 0. Lower 1 - 31.  */
tirq.addr = 0;
tlmu_notify_event(t, TLMU_TLM_EVENT_IRQ, &tirq);

tirq.data = 3; /* Raise interrupt line nr 32 and 33. Lower 34 - 63.  */
tirq.addr = 4; /* Write to the second irq register.  */
tlmu_notify_event(t, TLMU_TLM_EVENT_IRQ, &tirq);
@end example

TLMu exports a set of 32bit registers that represent the interrupt pending
bits. With tlmu_notify_event, the main emulator can modify the current
state and raise / lower interrupts.

@subsection Direct Memory Interface

The direct memory interface allows both TLMu and the main emulator to setup
fast access to memory models. If calls to the bus_access callback or to the
tlmu_bus_access return 1, it means that the accessed device is a candidate
for DMI. To set up the actual mapping, TLMu will call the get_dmi_ptr
callback or the main emulator should call the tlmu_get_dmi_ptr() function
call.

These calls take a struct tlmu_dmi pointer and fill it out.

@example
struct tlmu_dmi
@{
    void *ptr;                   /* Host pointer for direct access.  */
    uint64_t base;               /* Physical address represented by *ptr.  */
    uint64_t size;               /* Size of DMI mapping.  */
    int prot;                    /* Protection bits.  */
    unsigned int read_latency;   /* Read access delay.  */
    unsigned int write_latency;  /* Write access delay.  */
@};

/*
 * Try to setup direct memory access to a RAM (or RAM like device).
 *
 * t      - pointer to the TLMu instance
 * dmi    - pointer to a tlmu_dmi structure to fill out.
 *
 * Return 1 if success.
 */
int tlmu_get_dmi_ptr(struct tlmu *t, struct tlmu_dmi *dmi);
@end example

@subsection Creating QEMU machines with TLMu support

Modifying a QEMU machine to get TLMu connections is fairly easy. You need to
include some tlmu header files.

@example
#include "tlm.h"
#include "tlm_mem.h"
@end example

Then you need to leave some address space empty, the space you want to pass
over to the main emulator. If you want, it can be the entire address space or
only portions of it.

Create tlm mappings:
@example
/*
 * Map a TLMu area.
 *
 * env             - CPUState for the connected core.
 * addr            - Base address
 * size            - Size of mapping
 * sync_period_ns  - Sync timer interval
 * cpu_irq         - Interrupt lines
 * nr_irq          - Number of interrupt lines
 */
void tlm_map(CPUState *env, uint64_t addr, uint64_t size,
                           uint64_t sync_period_ns,
                           qemu_irq *cpu_irq, uint32_t nr_irq);
@end example

You can create multiple mappings, but only the first last one may connect
to interrupts. This limitation might be removed in the future.

Good examples too look at are:

@itemize
@item
hw/tlm_mach.c           - Bare TLMu cores for MIPS, ARM and CRIS
@end itemize


@section SystemC TLM-2.0 integration

@subsection Overview
An example on howto integrate TLMu into a SystemC TLM-2.0 system is provided
in tests/tlmu/sc_example. There are many possible ways to connect TLMu into
TLM-2.0, so sc_example is just one example of how it can be done. Let's look
at it in more detail.

@itemize
@item
tlmu_sc.cc      - System-C module wrapping TLMu
@item
iconnect.h      - Template of a generic TLM-2.0 interconnect
@item
memory.cc       - A TLM-2.0 RAM model
@item
magicdev.cc     - A TLM-2.0 device
@item
sc_example.cc   - System-C example app
@end itemize

@subsection tlmu_sc.cc
The tlmu_sc class wraps TLMu into a System-C module with a set of TLM-2.0
sockets and methods to interact with the QEMU based emulators.

@subsection tlmu_sc TLM-2.0 methods
The most common methods you'll need to use are:
@itemize
@item
tlmu_sc    - Constructor used to create a TLMu instance
@item
map_ram    - Used to tell TLMu, which memory areas on your system that are RAMs
@item
append_arg - To setup the argument list for TLMu
@item
wake       - Used to tell TLMu to leave sleep mode
@item
sleep      - Used to tell TLMu to enter sleep mode
@end itemize


@subsection tlmu_sc TLM-2.0 sockets
TLM-2.0 sockets:
@itemize
@item
from_tlmu_sk    - Initiator socket used by TLMu to do transactions onto your TLM-2.0 bus
@item
to_tlmu_sk      - Target socket used to do transactions into TLMu
@item
to_tlmu_irq_sk  - Target socket used to signal interrupts to TLMu
@end itemize

For example, when emulating a bare CPU in TLMu, all memory accesses leave TLMu
and get issued as transactions on the from_tlmu_sk initiator socket.

If you are emulating a partial TLMu system (a CPU core with a set of
peripherals), you can make bus accesses onto the TLMu bus by issuing
transactions on the to_tlmu_sk target socket.

If you need to signal an interrupt to a TLMu CPU, you can issue a transaction
to the to_tlmu_irq_sk target socket. These transactions will write or read
directly to/from the interrupt pending registers. See @ref{interrupts} for
more info.

@bye
